---
title: Ombudsman rejects affordable housing complaint against Southwark
description: "Evidence of unaudited schemes ignored  "
date: 2022-10-31T08:49:56.753Z
---
The Local Government and Social Care Ombudsman has rejected a complaint by a member of the 35% Campaign that Southwark Council has no effective monitoring system for the delivery of affordable housing through private housing developments.  The judgement (LINK) comes after an 18-month enquiry process, with the Ombudsman ruling that *'based on the evidence seen so far, there was no fault because the Council does have an effective methods for carrying out its functions'*.

However, the Ombudsman declined to investigate discrepancies between the affordable housing figures given on [Southwark's interactive audit](https://urldefense.com/v3/__https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=eyJrIjoiODIzNTdiMGUtMDAxNS00NGI1LThjY2EtYjBjMWQwYzcxMzQ2IiwidCI6ImNhZjg2Y2IxLThjYTItNDU0NS1hNGRkLWYzNTlkMDM5MGEwOCJ9&pageName=ReportSection__;!!Ou-zFulSALS7ubxZ2oj45Dg!Vqi3bagEzmK7icBcQgGm18ZQk8FHJAYsCVjB_M_V6G6fzAaRhemokxPlAzcnrCU09xxdfdKYI2SsLLc63Oa-DmfMFJGVKA$) and those found on other reports, from both Southwark Council and the Greater London Authority (GLA).  This evidence showed a difference of over 3,500 in the number of recorded social rented units and number audited.  It also indicated that over 200 completed schemes, listed by the GLA, remain unaudited.  The Ombudsman declined to take this evidence into account because *'this issue was not directly connected to the original complaint').* (LINK/SCREENSHOT)

### The two complaints

This was the second complaint to the Ombudsman on this issue.   Southwark had undertaken to introduce effective monitoring procedures, after the Ombudsman found that none were in place, following an [earlier complaint in 2016](https://www.35percent.org/posts/2016-12-12-ombudsman-slams-southwark-for-no-s106-monitoring/) .  The new procedures were to include annual audits.  In the six years since then, though, only two incomplete audits have been published.  An online monitoring tool, able to record live data, and commissioned by Southwark was never launched.

In response to the second complaint Southwark explained that the four-year gap between the first audit in 2017 and the second in 2022 was caused by the large amount of data that had had to be processed.  Most of this task had been undertaken by two officers, later increased to ten officers to complete the project.  Southwark also said that *'better'* off-the-peg software had replaced the online tool it had commissioned and that it was now working with another software developer to build a comprehensive new tool.

Southwark explained enforcing the legal s106 agreements, which guarantees affordable housing, was complicated by their variety.  It cited [one legal case](https://www.35percent.org/posts/2017-06-20-signal-tower-embarrassment-southwark-pays-for-lost-affordable-housing/), where affordable homes had been returned after a significant failure to comply with the s106, but said otherwise *'most breaches'* were *'easily...resolved'*. 

### The Ombudsman's decision

The Ombudsman noted in his decision that there was a *'gap of several years between issuing annual reports'* and it is only in the last year that the council had *'substantially completed its database'*.  Nonetheless he concluded that this did not amount to a fault, because the task *'was always likely to take a long time'*.   No time period had been set for this in the Ombudsman's 2016 complaint decision.  The Ombudsman also decided that the council was not at fault for replacing the bespoke tool with proprietary software, because this was a matter for them to decide.

The Ombudsman therefore concluded *'I am satisfied that the Council now has effective means to capture and record AHO* \[Affordable Housing Obligations] *for enforcement and other purposes'.*

### What we think

The Ombudsman's decision is a disappointment to us.  We believe that the Ombudsman treats Southwark very benevolently, given what his own report tells us.  It says that Southwark only** *'now*** *has effective means'* of monitoring affordable housing delivery, (our emphasis), six years after the issue came to light; the report does not dwell on what has been happening meantime.  A bespoke tool that could have monitored real-time delivery has been discarded and another, not specifically designed for the task, is being used instead, with the possibility of reverting to a purpose-built tool later.  

### ....missing units

The Ombudsman's report also says that the database of schemes has only been *'substantially'* completed in the last year.  This is a generous description, given that there is a 3,556 unit gap between the number of units of social housing Southwark says it has delivered  and those recorded by the audit.  Southwark's [Housing Facts and Figures webpage](https://www.southwark.gov.uk/planning-and-building-control/planning-policy-and-transport-policy/monitoring/authority-monitoring-report/housing?chapter=4) says that 5,597 social rented homes have been built since 2004/05, whereas only 2,041 have been [recorded in the audit ](https://www.southwark.gov.uk/planning-and-building-control/planning-policy-and-transport-policy/monitoring/authority-monitoring-report/housing?chapter=4) (since 2002).

SCREEN SHOTS; AUDIT PAGE (2041 figure); TABLE 8, Housing Facts and Figures)

### ....missing schemes

The Greater London Authority (GLA), which funds much affordable housing, also has responsibility for monitoring its delivery across London.  Our examination of the [GLA database](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/glaintelligence/viz/PlanningLondonDatahub-Dashboard/MainDashboard) found 209 completed schemes listed as having provided affordable housing in Southwark, as part of a planning permission, but which do not appear in Southwark's own audit.  

One-hundred and forty one of these schemes can be found on [Southwark's planning portal](https://www.southwark.gov.uk/planning-and-building-control/planning-applications/planning-register-search-view-and-comment-on-planning-applications) and date from at least 2004 onwards.  Many are simple one- and two-unit conversions, but there are also much larger schemes, including parts of Elephant Park,  Canada Water with thirty-eight schemes for between ten and 100 units.

### ....weak enforcement actions

While the Ombudsman does not consider these discrepancies in the number of schemes and social rented units, he does consider how the affordable housing obligations are enforced.  This has a couple of alarming explanations from Southwark's officers, about how affordable housing is secured and retained.  The first is that *'there were cases where there had been changes between what was originally expected during the planning (sic) and what was finally agreed in section 106 agreements. **It was sometimes difficult to know what changes had occurred....'*** (our emphasis).

This is wrong and should not be happening.  There should be no *'change between what was originally expected during planning'* and *'what was finally agreed in s106 agreements'* and it is the business of Southwark's planning officers to make sure that there is no change.  When there are changes Southwark's officers should be able to say why there have been changes and ensure that they are only be made through the proper processes.

Most major residential planning applications (over 10 units) are decided by a planning committee of elected councillors, who will approve a scheme that provides a precise amount of affordable housing of given tenures. If the developer cannot deliver what has been agreed at committee, then a s106 agreement for something different should not be signed; it is not for officers and developers to agree something other than was approved by committee. 

The report does not say how often this has occurred, but goes on  to relate an explanation from Southwark's officers that *'evolving policy'* or loss of funding may be reasons for changes, between committee and legal agreement.  Again, this should not be happening; applications are judged against emerging policy, where relevant, and changes to funding, or the viability of an agreed scheme should be addressed by way of formal variations.  Officers note that some applications change through such variations, but only on *'other occasions'*.

In any event, a look at the Southwark's planning [enforcement action webpages](https://planning.southwark.gov.uk/online-applications/search.do?action=simple&searchType=Enforcement) shows only twelve enforcement notices relating to affordable housing have been issued since 2016.  Ten of these were lodged on the same day (10 May 2022 - three months after the Ombudsman began his investigation).  Three remain open, including an [audit of social rents on Elephant Park](https://southwarknews.co.uk/news/housing/fears-raised-that-100-elephant-park-social-rent-properties-are-charging-tenants-incorrectly/) (link).

### ....Gutenberg Court - social rent or affordable rent?

The lack of enforcement actions could be taken to show that all affordable housing is being properly delivered, but the Ombudsman's report notes that *'In some cases, the type of AHO* \[Affordable Housing Obligations] *tenancy was not what had been required'.*  The report does not say  how often this has occurred, but one instance that has come to light is that of [Gutenberg Court](https://planning.southwark.gov.uk/online-applications/applicationDetails.do?keyVal=ZZZV1QKBWR443&activeTab=summary).  This was a development of 38 homes, including nine social rented homes, approved by Bermondsey Community Council planning committee in 2011.  [Southwark Law Centre](https://www.southwarklawcentre.org.uk/) complained to Southwark Council in October 2021 that the social rented units were being wrongly  advertised to the housing waiting list as *'market related rents'*, not *'social rents'*, on the council's [Homeseach](https://www.southwarkhomesearch.org.uk/) webpages.  The development now appears in Southwark's audit as delivering nine affordable rent units (which can be up to 80% market rent) and zero social rent units. (SCREEN SHOT)

The difference between affordable rent and social rent is readily seen in the rents charged.  The Gutenberg Court rents were advertised on Homesearch as £261.44 (one-bed) and £295.50 (two-bed).  This compares to the [social rent formula rent caps for 2022/23](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/rent-standard/limit-on-annual-rent-increases-2022-23-from-april-2022#rent-caps) of £155.73 (one-bed) and £164.87 (two-bed). (SCREEN SHOT)

The scheme has been 'red-flagged' on [Southwark's audit](https://urldefense.com/v3/__https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=eyJrIjoiODIzNTdiMGUtMDAxNS00NGI1LThjY2EtYjBjMWQwYzcxMzQ2IiwidCI6ImNhZjg2Y2IxLThjYTItNDU0NS1hNGRkLWYzNTlkMDM5MGEwOCJ9&pageName=ReportSection__;!!Ou-zFulSALS7ubxZ2oj45Dg!Vqi3bagEzmK7icBcQgGm18ZQk8FHJAYsCVjB_M_V6G6fzAaRhemokxPlAzcnrCU09xxdfdKYI2SsLLc63Oa-DmfMFJGVKA$), but no enforcement action is listed on the [enforcement action webpages](https://planning.southwark.gov.uk/online-applications/search.do?action=simple&searchType=Enforcement).

### Conclusion - everything is not alright

The Ombudsman's findings, that he was '...*satisfied that the Council now has effective means to capture and record AHO \[Affordable Housing Data] for enforcement and other purposes'* and that there was '*no fault because the Council does have an effective methods for carrying out its functions'* will be welcomed by Southwark, particularly following the Ombudsman's adverse finding in 2016.   It will also no doubt be used to deflect any criticisms that affordable housing delivery is still not properly monitored and that we are losing such housing, particularly social housing, because of this.

But the Ombudsman's own report paints a picture of a service that is still not on top of the monitoring job, six years after he first exposed the problem.  The personnel tasked with auditing the *'large amount of documentary evidence'*, covering fifteen years, was limited - two officers (only later increased to ten, *'to complete the project'*). Only two annual audits were completed in six years and solid evidence from Southwark and the GLA sources, that a large number of schemes and units have been omitted, has not been considered.  A bespoke online tool was commissioned, then abandoned (at unspecified cost), with another now apparently in the works.  

The process for securing affordable housing, as related by the report, also appears haphazard.  Significant changes are being made to approved applications, for different reasons and at different point in the planning process, which Southwark officers cannot properly explain - another indication that a proper monitoring process is not in place.  The significance of this does not appear to have been registered by the Ombudsman.

It is the facts on the ground though, that expose Southwark's monitoring failure.  Gutenberg Court is one example of a scheme with social housing, approved by planning committee several years ago, now appearing on Southwark's Homesearch website with 'market related' rents very much higher than social rents.  Elephant Park is also under scrutiny because of the high level of its social rents.  For as long as we have cases like this, Southwark Council must not be allowed to lapse into complacency, simply because the Ombudsman says everything is alright.